In an episode of Mix with the
Masters, 15-time Grammy Award
winner Jaycen Joshua revealed how he
processes 808s that need more sauce.
Start by placing an EQ on your 808
and applying a low-pass filter,
cutting out everything above 200Hz.
Next, duplicate this channel and
switch the low-pass to a high-pass,
removing everything below 200 Hz.
Now you’ve got control over the low and
high frequencies of your 808, independently.
Then, add your saturation plugin
of choice. Joshua uses options like
UAD’s Tubescreamer and Plugin Alliance's
Blackbox, but if you don’t own either,
the Airwindows collection is free
and offers excellent saturation
tools. Other free options include Softube’s
Saturation Knob and IVGI 2 by Klanghelm.
After adding saturation, apply a low-pass
on the duplicated 808 around 5 kHz,
effectively creating a band-pass filter.
The goal here is to add upper harmonics
to just this frequency range of the 808.
These harmonics help the bass cut through
on smaller speakers like phones, earbuds,
and laptops. This way, we avoid interfering
with the low-end and introducing phase issues,
while also keeping the highs clear so they
don’t clash with other elements in the mix.
After the EQ, Joshua adds PS22 X-Split by Waves,
which converts mono signals to stereo using
what Waves calls “Advanced Stereo Synthesis.”
A great free alternative is Polyverse’s Wider,
which like the PS22 retains mono compatibility.
I know what you’re thinking—stereo
width on my 808? But remember,
we’re only applying this effect to the upper
band of frequencies, leaving the low end intact.
In the Mix with the Masters episode, Joshua
explains that he keeps the low frequencies
of his 808 in mono but uses this stereo width
technique to create separation from the kick drum.
PS22 X-Split is unique because it converts
mono sounds to stereo using its advanced
stereo synthesis, making it ideal for adding
width without compromising low-end focus.
I'm highlighting this as most stereo spreading
plugins rely on delay to simulate stereo width,
but this can introduce a range of downsides,
like phase issues and a loss of clarity.
This is likely why Joshua opts for PS22.
Polyverse’s Wider isn’t exactly the same,
but it avoids phase issues thanks to its
comb filtering algorithm. You can learn
more about how it works on its website.
Thank you for watching.